feat: adding new page for Transform JSON structure (#3125)
Kotlin/kotlinx.serialization: docs-website/topics/serialization-transform-json.md

or [`Decoder`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx.serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.encoding/-decoder/) manually.

The `JsonTransformingSerializer` implements the [`KSerializer`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization/-k-serializer/) interface, which
lets you override the [`transformSerialize()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-json/kotlinx.serialization.json/-json-transforming-serializer/transform-serialize.html) and [`transformDeserialize()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-json/kotlinx.serialization.json/-json-transforming-serializer/transform-deserialize.html) functions to adjust the JSON element tree either before serialization or before deserialization.

> In addition to transforming JSON structures, you can also use `JsonContentPolymorphicSerializer` to [select the appropriate polymorphic class based on the JSON content](#select-the-appropriate-polymorphic-class-based-on-the-json-content).
> 
{style="tip"} 

## Modify JSON structure

> You can make small structural adjustments to JSON by transforming the JSON element tree.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can make structural adjustments to JSON by transforming the JSON element tree.
```

You can make any adjustments you like ;)

The following examples demonstrate common use cases, such as wrapping or unwrapping arrays and omitting specific properties.

### Wrap a single object in an array during deserialization

Some APIs return a single JSON object when there is one item and an array when there are multiple.
If you want both cases to deserialize into a [`List`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin.collections/-list/), use
`JsonTransformingSerializer` to modify the JSON element tree during deserialization.
To implement the wrapping logic, override the `transformDeserialize()` function.

> > You must specify a serializer when calling the `JsonTransformingSerializer` constructor.

Reviewer: I'd use more specific verb than 'use'. E.g. `Extend JsonTransformingSerializer` or `Subclass JsonTransformingSerializer`

> To use the standard conversion logic for the type, specify a default serializer.
> For example, you can use the default list serializer with the [`ListSerializer()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization.builtins/-list-serializer.html) function.
>
{style="note"}

Here's an example:

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.builtins.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
// Uses UserListSerializer to handle the serialization of the users property
@Serializable
data class Project(
    val name: String,
    // Specifies a custom serializer for the users property
    @Serializable(with = UserListSerializer::class)
    val users: List<User>
)

@Serializable
data class User(val name: String)

> // Specifies the default List serializer

Author: good point 👍 — I like the second version let's go with that.

object UserListSerializer : JsonTransformingSerializer<List<User>>(ListSerializer(User.serializer())) {
    // If not an array, wrap the element as a single-item array
    override fun transformDeserialize(element: JsonElement): JsonElement =
        if (element !is JsonArray) JsonArray(listOf(element)) else element
}

fun main() {

>     // Deserializes a single JSON object wrapped as an array

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // Deserializes a single JSON object and wraps it into an array
```

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.builtins.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
@Serializable
data class Project(
  val name: String,
  @Serializable(with = UserListSerializer::class)
  val users: List<User>
)

@Serializable
data class User(val name: String)

// Unwraps single-element lists into a single object during serialization
object UserListSerializer : JsonTransformingSerializer<List<User>>(ListSerializer(User.serializer())) {

    override fun transformSerialize(element: JsonElement): JsonElement {
        // Ensures that the input is a list
        require(element is JsonArray)
        // Unwraps single-element lists into a single JSON object
        return element.singleOrNull() ?: element
    }
}
  
fun main() {
    val data = Project("kotlinx.serialization", listOf(User("kotlin")))
    println(Json.encodeToString(data))
    // {"name":"kotlinx.serialization","users":{"name":"kotlin"}}
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

### Omit specific properties during serialization

> You can omit properties from the JSON output. This can be useful when they have default values, match specific values, or when the values are missing.

Reviewer: I do not understand `This can be useful when they have default values, match specific values, or when the values are missing.` sentence at all. When property has a default value, it is omitted automatically by framework. Original wording was "Imagine that you cannot specify a default value for the language property in the Project data model for some reason", indicating that property _does not_ have default Kotlin value. "Match specific values" also unclear to me.

Author: 🤔 oh I see it — I wanted to summarize loosely related things here (e.g.: match specific values = omit property if it equals/matches a value)

> cannot specify a default value

I missed this logical step, but it helped, thank you... based on that WDYT about something very straightforward like:

> You can use `JsonTransformingSerializer` when you can't [specify a default value](serialization-customization-options.md#set-default-values-for-optional-properties), but still want to omit a property when it has a specific value.
To do so, create a custom serializer and override the `transformSerialize()` function:

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.builtins.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
@Serializable
class Project(val name: String, val language: String)

// Creates a custom serializer that omits the language property if it's equal to "Kotlin"
object ProjectSerializer : JsonTransformingSerializer<Project>(Project.serializer()) {
    override fun transformSerialize(element: JsonElement): JsonElement =
        // Omits the language property if its value is "Kotlin"
        JsonObject(element.jsonObject.filterNot {
            (k, v) -> k == "language" && v.jsonPrimitive.content == "Kotlin"
        })
}

fun main() {
    val data = Project("kotlinx.serialization", "Kotlin")

    // Uses the default serializer
    println(Json.encodeToString(data))
    // {"name":"kotlinx.serialization","language":"Kotlin"}

    // Applies the custom serializer to omit the language property 
    println(Json.encodeToString(ProjectSerializer, data))
    // {"name":"kotlinx.serialization"}
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> In this example, the `Project` class has a `language` property, which is omitted when its value is `"Kotlin"`.

Reviewer 2: Personally, I like the version with the extended description: 

> Here's an example where the Project class has a language property, which is omitted when its value is "Kotlin":

But not sure that how it will look in the docs (and will it look better?)

The custom serializer is passed to `encodeToString()` to ensure the custom transformation is applied.

> When serializing an object directly, you need to explicitly pass the custom serializer to the `encodeToString()`
> function to ensure that the custom serialization logic is applied. For more information, see the [Pass serializers manually](third-party-classes.md#pass-serializers-manually) section.
>
{style="note"}

## Select the appropriate polymorphic class based on the JSON content

In [polymorphic serialization](serialization-polymorphism.md), JSON often includes a dedicated _class discriminator_ property that identifies the concrete subtype during deserialization.

When no class discriminator is present in the JSON input, you can use [`JsonContentPolymorphicSerializer`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-json/kotlinx.serialization.json/-json-content-polymorphic-serializer/) to infer the type from the structure of the JSON.
This serializer allows you to override the `selectDeserializer()` function to choose the correct deserializer based on the JSON content.

> > When you use this serializer, the appropriate deserializer is chosen at runtime.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what you mean by this tip. You can return any serializer you want from `selectDeserializer`, it can be registered or not registered, default or non-default.

Reviewer: I think you got confused with 
> When you use this serializer to serialize data, either [registered](https://github.com/Kotlin/kotlinx.serialization/blob/master/docs/polymorphism.md#registered-subclasses) or the default serializer is selected for the actual type at runtime:

note later. What it means if you use this serializer to **encode** the data, it will try to pick the appropriate one for you, as `selectDeserializer` affects only **decoding**. Maybe you can rewrite the tip in this direction?

Author: Thank you 🙏 yes definitely, how about:

> When you use this serializer to serialize data, Kotlin serialization uses the serializer of the value's actual runtime type.
> This could be one you [specified in a `SerializersModule`](serialization-polymorphism.md#serialize-closed-polymorphic-classes) or the default serializer.

> It may be one you [specified in a `SerializersModule`](serialization-polymorphism.md#serialize-closed-polymorphic-classes) or the default serializer.
>
{style="tip"}

Here's an example:

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.builtins.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
@Serializable
abstract class Project {
    abstract val name: String
}

@Serializable
data class BasicProject(override val name: String): Project()

@Serializable

> data class OwnedProject(override val name: String, val owner: String) : Project()

Author: fair point — we could theoretically break it down and put the actual runnable example in just as:

```
//rest of the code before
//sampleStart
fun main() {
    val data = listOf(
        OwnedProject("kotlinx.serialization", "kotlin"),
        BasicProject("example")
    )
    val string = Json.encodeToString(ListSerializer(ProjectSerializer), data)
    println(string)
    println(Json.decodeFromString(ListSerializer(ProjectSerializer), string))
}
//sampleEnd
```

sealed class Project {
    abstract val name: String
}

@OptIn(ExperimentalSerializationApi::class)
@KeepGeneratedSerializer
@Serializable(with = BasicProjectSerializer::class)
@SerialName("basic")
data class BasicProject(override val name: String): Project()

// Adds custom logic to the default serializer to rename a field during deserialization
object BasicProjectSerializer : JsonTransformingSerializer<BasicProject>(BasicProject.generatedSerializer()) {
    override fun transformDeserialize(element: JsonElement): JsonElement {
        val jsonObject = element.jsonObject
        // Renames "basic-name" to "name" if it exists in the JSON input
        return if ("basic-name" in jsonObject) {
            val nameElement = jsonObject["basic-name"] ?: throw IllegalStateException()
            JsonObject(mapOf("name" to nameElement))
        } else {
            jsonObject
        }
    }
}

fun main() {

    // Deserializes JSON where the field name differs from the expected structure
    val project = Json.decodeFromString<Project>("""{"type":"basic","basic-name":"example"}""")

    println(project)
    // BasicProject(name=example)
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> In this example, the custom serializer updates the JSON structure during deserialization by renaming a field so it matches the `name` property defined in the base class.

Reviewer: Again, explanation "what's happening" is better be placed before example.

        """{"name":"example"}"""
    )
    println(fromInternal)
    // Project(name=example)
}
//sampleEnd

```

-->

## Implement custom serialization logic in JSON
<primary-label ref="experimental-general"/>

If the transformation functions provided by `JsonTransformingSerializer` or
`JsonContentPolymorphicSerializer` aren't enough, you can implement custom
serialization logic by defining your own [`KSerializer`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-core/kotlinx.serialization/-k-serializer/) class.

This gives you full control over how values are serialized and deserialized by overriding the
`serialize()` and `deserialize()` functions directly.

When you implement custom serialization logic for JSON, you can cast `Encoder` to
`JsonEncoder` and `Decoder` to `JsonDecoder` to call JSON-specific functions such as
[`decodeJsonElement()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-json/kotlinx.serialization.json/-json-decoder/decode-json-element.html) and [`encodeToJsonElement()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-json/kotlinx.serialization.json/encode-to-json-element.html).

> These functions allow you to retrieve and insert JSON elements at specific points in the serialization process.

Author: 🤔 I got confused by the original here a bit, but I see what you mean. Do you think something like this would work? 

> These functions allow you to retrieve and insert JSON elements for the value the serializer is currently handling.

or perhaps a slightly longer but a bit more descriptive:

> These functions allow you to retrieve and insert JSON elements at the position of the value currently handled by the serializer.

___
For reference I think with the previous version the sentence would be confusing (at least to me 🤔 )
These functions allow you to retrieve and insert JSON elements at the current position in the serialization process.

This allows you to preserve these properties in the serializable class without modifying the original JSON structure.

Here's an example:

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.builtins.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*
import kotlinx.serialization.descriptors.*
import kotlinx.serialization.encoding.*

//sampleStart
data class UnknownProject(val name: String, val details: JsonObject)

object UnknownProjectSerializer : KSerializer<UnknownProject> {
    override val descriptor: SerialDescriptor = buildClassSerialDescriptor("UnknownProject") {
        element<String>("name")
        element<JsonElement>("details")
    }

    override fun deserialize(decoder: Decoder): UnknownProject {
        // Ensures the decoder is JSON-specific
        val jsonInput = decoder as? JsonDecoder ?: error("Can be deserialized only by JSON")

        // Reads the entire content as JSON
        val json = jsonInput.decodeJsonElement().jsonObject

>         // Extracts and removes the name property

Reviewer: Pay attention to comments and code: "removes the name property" is performed by `details.remove("name")` which is located in the next block. Move those two lines here.
